How to invest in 2019
We believe the answer lies in reconciling two very different and powerful developments in the world. The first is a return to pre-crisis normalcy in the global monetary system and markets. The second is the uncomfortable new normal in politics and international relations. The return to normalcy in the global monetary system and markets concerns central banks’ bringing to an end their emergency measures to prevent the Global Financial Crisis of 2008 becoming a new Great Depression. Central banks are gradually retreating from zero borrowing costs and their multi-trillion dollar asset purchases that had fueled markets. The withdrawal of these measures has seen market volatility rise, unsettling many investors who had become accustomed to the placid conditions of recent years. Against this backdrop, 2018 was different to 2017 for investors. Global equities were down 4.3% for the year as of 1 December, compared to their 20.0% gain the prior year. Emerging markets fell 14.1%, after their 34.4% rally in 2017. This pullback may have been partly a reaction to the strong gains that preceded it. But the withdrawal of monetary stimulus - as well as rate rises in the US - clearly left markets more vulnerable to the political shock of the escalating international trade war in particular. Asset prices thus suffered greater volatility than they had done for several years. The return to normalcy has not felt as good as investors may have expected. In politics and geopolitics, by contrast, normalcy is in retreat. The post-Cold War international order – characterized by multilateral cooperation, freer movement of people, and more tolerant societies – is under pressure. Voters in countries including the US, the UK, The Philippines, Italy, Hungary, and Brazil have given their backing over recent years to political movements fronted by populist strongmen whose agendas are characterized by foreign policy isolationism, economic nationalism, closed borders, and perhaps also authoritarian law-and-order policies. The populist strongmen have skillfully played upon voters’ fears and insecurities. Income stagnation, growing wealth inequality, official corruption, and intellectual property theft do indeed present genuine challenges in many countries. But the strongmen have been quicker to decry the problems than to propose genuine answers. Anti-immigrant rhetoric has intensified, while immigrants’ social and economic contribution has been ignored. Greater security has been offered in return for sacrificing some personal liberties. In certain countries, a restoration of national greatness has been promised, with the details of implementation to be filled in later. We do not see this new and uncomfortable political normalcy reversing any time soon. Certain leaders will continue to seek to bolster their powers, sweeping aside many checks and balances. President Xi has already abolished limits on his time in office in China, while Brazil’s new president Bolsonaro has praised the country’s former dictatorship. Any weakening of global economic growth could further strengthen nationalist sentiment, the appetite for trade tariffs, and calls to vest even greater power in the hands of these politicians. Faced with the return of market normalcy on the one hand and its retreat politically, how should you invest in 2019? The approach we take in Outlook 2019 has two main elements. First, we create guideposts to determine how we may anticipate events, and assess their potential impact on your portfolio. Second, we advise building stronger portfolios for turbulent times by investing in more resilient assets and by employing strategies that reshape investment outcomes. By watching the guideposts, you can then make portfolio adjustments going forward, seeking additional diversification, and tactically exploiting valuation opportunities as they arise.Among our key guideposts for 2019 is the state of global trade. The escalation of trade tensions in 2018 took many investors by surprise, triggering volatility in markets in China and other emerging economies in particular. As longer-term investors, we continue watching trade developments, as well as Chinese and Asian economic performance, and comparing them to market data to determine whether or not it is an appropriate time to add or reduce exposure. As well as trade, we believe investors should focus upon the likely impact of the Fed’s gradual, but extended tightening cycle. Besides watching our guideposts, we also emphasize taking positive action now. The return of monetary and market normalcy – and the new normalcy in politics – make portfolio quality even more important. We therefore urge you to allocate to countries and companies that are most likely to withstand the challenges now facing the world. We also advocate seeking to augment your total return profile and help mitigate your risks. Here are nine steps that we recommend you consider to strengthen portfolios as we enter 2019. 1, Assess your portfolio now. Request your Outlook Watchlist, and discuss the opportunities with your Investment Counselor. Seek the insights of our Global Investment Lab where you have specialized queries. 2, Understand your risk profile. If you have a five- to ten-year investment horizon, you probably don’t need to change it. But if your circumstances or risk tolerance has changed, your portfolio should be updated accordingly. 3, Don’t try and time the financial markets – it’s a fool’s game. 4, Preserve your portfolio’s value by diversifying globally and adding higher quality assets. Global investors will be able to ride out turbulence better and may potentially recover faster. 5, Have a discretionary manager rebalance your portfolio as events unfold. By doing so quarterly or at least semi-annually, your portfolio should add assets when markets are cheaper and tilt towards markets likely to recover faster. As markets rally, such portfolios are likely to garner better risk-adjusted returns. 6, Manage your cash – all of it – more wisely. 7, Explore risk management tools as well as strategies with different risk-return characteristics. You can help preserve the safety and return potential of your portfolio this way. 8, Create an opportunistic element within your portfolio to allow you to invest during unusual events and short-term market dislocations. 9, Seek our advice more frequently, and let us help you understand the data, and interpret the guideposts. 
